Explainable Artificial Intelligence with Hybrid Ensemble Learnin g based Automated Code Comprehension Prediction 1 Bharat Babaso Mane, 2 Dr. Rathnakar Achary 1,2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Alliance University, Bengaluru, Karnataka - 562106, India. bharat.mane@gmail.com , rathnakar.achary@alliance.edu.in Abstract Code readability is deliberated an essential element of software quality . It reflects a human evaluation of the readability and comprehensibility in the source code . In recent times , it has more and more substantial development feature s in software engineering owing to the huge number of software projects and considerably increase d the difficulties and size. Code readability is strenuously relevant to the maintenance and significantly impacts software maintenance. To ensure precise classification models, the preceding analysis mainly relied on handcrafted features. N evertheless , the manual process of feature engineering is typically labor-intensive and can acquire only partial information about the source code , which has a limit to the model performance . Recently , numerous deep learning ( DL ) ?based code readability classification approaches are presented . A lthough it is still unclear what features of the input model generate its decisions, which hinders its practical utilization in the software in dustry. In this paper, we propose an Explainable for Code Readability Classification Using Vector Representations and Majority Voting-Based Ensemble Learning (ECRVR-MVEL) approach. The aim of this paper is to design an interpretable approach for code readability analysis that enhances code quality . To perform that, the proposed model initiall y preprocesses the input code that comprises four steps , namely tokenization, remov al comments or normalization of white space and detecting languages . Moreover, CodeBERT is used to transform raw code into vector representations , enabling robust text embeddings for a classification model . For classification , a weighted majority voting ensemble classification integrates a graph convolutional network, a deep belief network , and a bidirectional temporal convolutional network to categorize code readability into high, medium and low levels . Besides, the Nadam is applied to improve the performance of the code readability classification model. Eventually , the LIME is utilized to visualize the interpretability and ensure transparency of model. A n extensive result is accomplished to en sure the significance of the ECRVR-MVEL model under Python and C++ datasets . The simulation outcome s reported the promising solutions of the ECRVR-MVEL technique over other existing methodologies . Keywords : Code Readability Classification ; Ensemble Classification; Source Code ; Nadam Optimizer; Software Engineering; LIME 1 . Introduction Around 70 percentage of the life-cycle cost of a software project is in the maintenance stage. To e stimates the high cost of maintenance relates to the complexity of understanding and reading the source code , especially that authored by others that underlines the significance of code readability [ 1 ] . The c ode readability recommends to a human decision of readability and comprehensibility of the program?s source code. Evaluating the code readability snippets has been mandatory to assess their qualit i es [ 2 ] . Developers assume code readability to be a key aspect in their source code development activities as they frequently consume a lot of time for reading and understanding the source code. Easily comprehensible code streamlines maintenance activities, decreases bug introduction, and signifies the onboarding workflow for novel members [ 3 ] . Highlighting these dual features is important for the constant progress and growth of software projects. To simplify recycle , and generate maintainable and readable code, that significant to consider the following features when suggesting source code snippets [ 4 ] . Several examiners have introduced code developers that utilize the readability score generated by models as a feature in the code snippet grading procedure. Moreover, these scores individually denote the possibility of a code snippet being readable or unreadable, without producing a rating score for readability [ 5 ] . Ano ther method to measure the readability of code snippets is by the usage of ASATs like Sonar-Qube2. This tool provides a set of rules that could increase probable concerns with code readability violations [ 6 ] . The most important threat is probably applied feature engineering approach [ 7 ] . Such previous research (comprising but not restricted to) commonly hand-made surface-level features like line lengths or operator counts to indicate code readability. The procedure is confessedly time-consuming, and it is p ossi ble that a few significant factors will not be captured [ 8 ] . Therefore, rather than manual design and feature extraction, we propose a deep learning-driven method that could automatically learn the most complex underlying features from the source code [ 9 ] . Provide the possible significance of automatically measuring code readability, previous task concentrated on representing methods to attain this objective. Motioned methods depend on Machine Learning (ML) or Deep Learning (DL) methodologies and, therefore, they must be trained on a classified dataset. Initially , ML-driven techniques depended on feature engineering. [ 10 ] They determine textual, Structural, and visual aspects . That could be measured on the provided source code snippet. Those features were previously utilized to classify the (labeled) source code [ 11 ] . Lastly, datasets were develop ed to train a binary classifier that could classif y code snippets as ?readable? or ?unreadable.? The l atest literature analyzed the probability of developing DL-driven methods to enhance the accuracy of current techniques [ 12 ] . Paper Contribution To enhance the performance of code readability classification , this article presents a novel Explainable Code Readability Classification Using Vector Representations and Majority Voting-Based Ensemble Learning (ECRVR-MVEL) approach . The proposed ECRVR-MVEL method aims to design an interpretable framework for code readabilit y, which improves code quality . The proposed ECRVR-MVEL technique follows text preprocessing, CodeBERT embedding, weighted majority ensemble classification, optimization and explainability analysis for providing accurate, readable and transparent code quality. The proposed ECRVR-MVEL approach is calculated utilizing Python and C++ dataset s under numerous metrics . The significant contribution of this study is as follow s : Employ CodeBERT-based embedding for transforming raw code into vectorized representations , which enhances the robust code readability. Design a weighted majority voting ensemble model , which incorporates three deep learning approaches , namely graph convolutional network ( GCN ) , deep belief network ( DBN ) and bidirectional temporal network ( Bi-TCN ) techniques , for categorizing high, medium , and low levels and increas ing the performance of code readability analysis . Present a Nadam optimizer for hyperparameter tuning, which helps to accomplish improved performance of code readability classification with limited computational complexity . Utilize LIME-based explainability techniques to highlight code elements and provides inter pre table explanation . Validate the performance of the proposed ECRVR-MVEL technique under Python and C ++ datasets and calculate the results with several aspects . 2. Literature Survey of Code Readability Classification This section briefly reviews prior related works on code readability classification . Simoes and Venson [ 13 ] propose using Large Language Models (LLMs) to examine the quality of code characteristics associated with its readability in a reproducible, normalized, and reliable way. The a uthor performed quasi-experiment research to determine the impacts of code modifications on LLM explanation with respect to its readability as a quality characteristic. Nine LLMs ha ve been examined, continuing three measures: eliminating comments, replac e classifier names with unclear names, and restructuring for eliminat ing code smells. Vitale et al. [ 14 ] proposed to gauge readability of code based on subjective perceptions through developers and modified code readability methodology for assessment . Consequently, author s adopt an LLM with less amount of learning to attain their objective. The outcomes are display ed that the method attains poorer outcomes than a pioneering feature-driven method that is developed to work at the snippet-level. ?lvarez-Fidalgo et al. [ 15 ] proposed CLAVE, an innovative DL method for source code verification of authorship that exploits different learning. The authors early pre-train CLAVE on Python?s source code documents separated from GitHub. Then, author fine-tuning CLAVE for authorship verification utilizing de ep learning on Python-based submissions by unique developers. Segedinac et al. [ 16 ] proposed the Python code readability statements generally utilized courses. The readability method depends up on track s the eye movement of the reader during the reading phase. It utilize s ML, models and depends on a new set of observational features that monitor how the codes are read by readers. The ML approach forecast readability base d on the collective data and the textual code snippet and structural aspects . Fawareh et al. [ 17 ] presented the effect of AI-created code on software quality, concentrating on readability, code complexity, quality, and documentation. It assesses main metrics like cyclomatic complexity (CC), comment density, code lines, variable names, and code-to-code ratio. The outcomes exposed that though both AI-created and human-created code could be effective and brief, code created by AI tools displays a better focus , more clearly on documentation. AI-created code , particularly in difficult activities , displayed enhanced readability through gr e ater comment density and clear variable name usage. Gorchakov et al. [ 18 ] presented the progress and analyses of methodologies that are developed to estimate the activities fixed by source code. Practica l usage of th ese task recognition approach comprise s model name forecasting, software ? hardware separating, detection of programming standard violation, and semantic code replication search. Tang et al. [ 19 ] proposed a new DL -based methodology , CSGVD, that deliberates vulnerability at the function-level identification as a graph binary classification activit y . Initially, the author present s a PE-BL element that obtains and improves the information from the existing language model. Lastly, a mean biaffine based attention pooling, M-BFA, to greater total node data as a graph?s feature illustration. Tashtoush et al. [ 20 ] introduces the existing shortcomings and research the relation among software complexity and code readability. Consequently, the significance of software complexity and code readability has been managed to assess the most time-consuming elements in every software maintenance tasks. Usually researches the relation between software complexity and code readability utilizing different complexity and readability metrics and ML algorithms. Table 1 presents a comparative analysis of prior studies on code readability classification. Table 1 Related work on existing code readability models Authors Research gap Models Datasets Outcomes Limitations Simoes and Venson [ 13 ] Semantic code readability evaluation using LLMs is not yet well validated against human judgment. LLM models Code snippet dataset Achieves Better performance. Model Assessments show response variability and limited reliability for consistent real-world use. Vitale et al. [ 14 ] Personalized, developer-specific code readability assessment is still not well developed. LLM models Ds and Db&amp;w, datasets. Attained a greater result. Inconsistent and contradictory dataset labels reduce model reliability. ?lvarez-Fidalgo et al. [ 15 ] Generalizable source code authorship verification for unseen programmers is still limited. Transformer, Contrastive learning and LLM techniques. Python dataset AUC of 0.9782. The approach depends heavily on Python and specific datasets, restricting broader real-world applicability. Segedinac et al. [ 16 ] Subjective, reader-behavior?based code readability modeling is still limited. ML model Python code snippets dataset F -measure of 0.85 Results are restricted to Python and undergraduate students, limiting generalization. Fawareh et al. [ 17 ] Limited empirical evidence compares AI-generated and human-written code quality across tasks of varying complexity. AI technique Code snippet dataset Obtained high code readability. Evaluation relies on selected metrics and specific tasks, which may not reflect real-world development diversity. Gorchakov et al. [ 18 ] Optimal source code representation methods for task classification are still unclear. KNN, MLP and SVM models. Python code snippets dataset Accuracy of 98.2 ? 1.3 Results depend on specific datasets and feature d