Feature Optimization with Simplified Spiking Neural Network for Developer-Centric Software Quality Assessment Abstract Software development has beco me a fundamental activity for businesses that increasingly depend on these to maintain their business. Nevertheless , low-grade software quality decreases client satisfaction. Software development is now considered a combined and technology-dependent activity implemented by a class of people . For these reasons , the developer ? s experience can p lay a n essential part in shaping the software quality they generate . The distribution of correct software developers ( for example: who own correct coding skills) to project is an important feature of popular software development. The difficult y is that it is very complicated for the project manager, a client, and software development companies to discover a suitable developer to allocate a specific project. To attain this, there is a requirement for such a sound mechanism that may identify the software developer 's coding expertise level . In recent times , deep learning (DL) methods have been extensively applied to assess the control of developer ?s experience on code quality. In this manuscript, we propose a n Empirical Evaluation of Software Quality Assessment through the Developer ' s Experience Level Using the Metaheuristic Optimization Algorithms (EESQA-DELMOA) model. The EESQA-DELMOA model aims to assess software quality by analy z ing the developers' experience levels on code reliability and maintainability. Initially, the data pre-processing stage applies the min-max normalization model to clean, transform, and organize raw data into a structured format. In addition, the proposed EESQA-DELMOA model implements a bio-inspired artificial hummingbird (BAHB) technique for the selection of feature process to se lect the most relevant features for enhancing model performance. Followed by, the simplified spiking neural network (SSNN) method has been deployed for the classification method. At last, the parameter tuning process is performed through an adaptive migration butterfly optimization algorithm (AMBOA) to improve the classification performance of SSNN classifier. The experimental evaluation of EESQA-DELMOA model occurs using a benchmark dataset. The stimulated results indicated the enhanced performance of the EESQA-DELMOA method compared to recent approaches. Keywords: Software Quality Assessment; Developers Experience Level; Adaptive Migration Butterfly Optimization Algorithm; Feature Selection; Deep Learning 1. Introduction In the current era of technology, the software development field is emerging at a quick rate as software solutions are everywhere. The progression in computer sciences allows software to play a vital part in every aspect of life [1] . The software solutions are helping in numerous domains, involving health care, education, business, transport, industry, and finance. Excessive dependence on software applications for dealing with every aspect of life increases the software's complexities [2] . Then, the client requests the software delivery shortly th r ough supreme quality maintenance of the product which makes software development more complex. Coping with such a difficult task, there exists a necessity for good software developers, beside s efficient software development techniques [3] . The concerns that influence the software ?s quality and productivity are the developer's coding knowledge and technical expertise. Those features result in less rework, rare coding errors, and fewer bug fixes . [4] . Additionally, in software engineering, the developer's knowledge plays a crucial part in determining the software quality they create [5] . It is widely believed that greater personal experience leads to improved proficiency. This theory is straightforward and led to numerous research exploring the association between experience and code quality that developers create [6] . However , experimental study in this domain frequently produces contradictory outcomes, underlining the difficulties of measuring and defining both knowledge and quality of the code in software development. For successful software development, detecting the software developer's experience level is very crucial [7] . Earlier works have presented diverse techniques for detecting developer knowledge with unconventional hiring procedures and individual characteristics deployment-based concepts [8] . Certain studies have concentrated on the developer's cognitive skill identification to distinguish between beginner and skilled developers. This model is expensive and a lengthy process. Therefore, to acquire the advantage of improvement in deep learning (DL), the developer's level of knowledge may be detected by methodically examining source code that was written by developers. The DL technique is inexpensive and beneficial for quickly reaching a decision [9] . The incredible progression of DL models has driven the development of DL applications, which give a market advantage for humans and are progressively set out in other life-critical areas. In these conditions, the growth of DL applications became significant for their progress [10] . This paper presents an Empirical Evaluation of Software Quality Assessment through Developer ' s Experience Level Using Metaheuristic Optimization Algorithms (EESQA- DELMOA) model. At a Primary stage , the data pre-processing phase uses min-max normalization method. Additionally , the proposed EESQA-DELMOA model performs bio-inspired artificial hummingbird (BAHB) technique for the selection of feature process. Afterward , the simplified spiking neural network (SSNN) method was deployed for the classification approach . Eventually , the parameter tuning process is implemented through adaptive migration butterfly optimization algorithm (AMBOA) method . The experimental evaluation of EESQA-DELMOA model occurs using a benchmark dataset. 2. Related Works Zamir et al. [11] intended to make a proposal model utilizing pull request review commentaries and chosen data from developers? sketches to suggest the best individual depending on their active experience. With the employment of innovative methods, the presented technique, Global Developer Expertise Recommendation System (GDERS), targets enhancing the taken information quality and significantly increasing the developer recommendation precision. Akhtar and Daviglus [12] explored the method employed in AI-based output measurement, evaluated their efficiency, and discussed the moral considerations of AI-assisted decision-making in software development. By analyzing designs in debugging sessions, pull request reviews and coding behavior, AI-assisted analysis offers a better understanding of productivity than traditional methods. Also, AI-aided devices could help in intelligent documentation and automatic testing, real-time code suggestions, reducing cognitive load , and increasing efficiency. In [13], both the perceptions and practices after testing in IoT landscapes, mainly open-source smart home settings, were discovered. This research is made of two vital modules. Firstly, extract and practically examine the code and incorporations of two extremely famous and well-preserved open-source IoT networks, HomeAssitant and OpenHab . The fame of IoT network s rises, and end users attain extraordinary control of the ir homes, daily task automation, and health monitoring. Bernardo et al. [14] introduced the Software Quality Assurance as a Service ( SQAaaS ) model and described an open-source execution stage. This stage is easily available, focused on open science and research software as well , a nd supports better practices through presenting standard-based digital devices to services and software. It offers a user-friendly network-based graphical user interface that enables communication to server-side modules accountable for spontaneously generating CD/CI (Continuous Delivery/Continuous Integration) procedures to automatic testing of the standard principles. Bayr? and Demirel [15] investigated the AI-based software testing application with a particular focus on the LLMs' impact on classical testing methods. Software testing is a serious factor in software development growth, guaranteeing the high-quality delivery of secure and reliable software systems. With the progress in AI and Natural Large Language Models (LLMs), Language Processing (NLP) has arisen as an influential tool able to understand and process natural language writings effortlessly. Samir et al. [16] concentrated on the challenges of allocating an appropriate developer to a fresh bug by evaluating the developers? profiles and bugs in each developer employing ML-driven system recommendations. Explainable AI (XAI) is an AI that people may recognize. It confronts ?black box? AI that even the creators can?t elucidate. By giving suitable elucidations to outcomes, end users will understand the important vision after the results, increasing the recommender system?s confidence, transparency, and effectiveness. Al MohamadSaleh and Alzahrani [17] created an SQA maturity paradigm, especially in the telecommunication industry. To accomplish this, the study recognized perceptions and aspects and relied on a complete work analysis and specialists? input through the Hierarchical Decision Modeling (HDM) method. The projected technique involves five perceptions: validation testing, requirements, organization and technology, culture, and software change management control, with all perceptions comprising related components . 3. Materials and Methods This paper presents an EESQA-DELMOA method. The objective of the EESQA-DELMOA model is to assess software quality by analy z ing the developers' experience levels o f code reliability and maintainability. It encompasses data pre-processing, feature selection, classification, and parameter tuning. Fig. 1 indicates the workflow of the EESQA-DELMOA model. 3.1. Data Pre-processing At first , the data preprocessing step uses the min-max normalization method for clean ing , transform ing , and organiz ing raw data into a structured pattern . Min-max normalization is a data preprocessing approach utilized for scaling numeric values inside a predetermined range , normally [0,1]. Concerning Software Quality Valuation , it supports normalize d metrics originat ing from developers? level of experience, like long-term experience , contribution frequency, or number of previous projects [18] . By standardizing these values, comparisons between developers become unbiased and fair , guaranteeing that anomalies are not allowed to alter quality calculations . This model allows steady combination of experience-related features in statistical analyses or ML methods . In g eneral , it helps more precise and explanatory evaluation of software quality through developer-related metrics. Fig. 1. W orkflow of EESQA-DELMOA Method 3.2. Dimensionality Reduction using BAHB Technique For the selection of feature process , the proposed EESQA-DELMOA model applies BAHB technique to select the most related features to improve model performance. This segment presents an optimization model named BAHB that is motivated by i